update sarek docs to follow 3.0 (#58)
qbic-pipelines/pipeline-docs: docs/markdown/pipelines/exomeseq.md

# WES & WGS analysis

To perform DNA seq and Variant calling analyses for short-read normal, tumor-only, and paired samples, we use the [nf-core/sarek](https://github.com/nf-core/sarek) pipeline.

> Initially designed for Human, and Mouse, it can work on any species with a reference genome. Sarek can also handle tumour / normal pairs and could include additional relapses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially designed for Human, and Mouse, it can work on any species with a reference genome. Sarek can also handle tumor / normal pairs and could include additional relapses.
```

Author: American spelling all the way :D

For an in-detail overview, please visit [https://nf-co.re/sarek](https://nf-co.re/sarek).

The pipeline can be utilized for Whole genome sequencing (WGS) and Whole Exome/Panel sequencing (WES).
There are some differences in running the pipeline for the two modalities, so the next sections provide examples and tips for the different types of analyses.

> > **_Note_** The pipeline was recently rewritten to DSL2, which brought a significant amount of changes. This document details usage for nf-core/sarek >3.0. If you need to rerun older versions, please take a look [here](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/pipeline-docs/blob/7f79a88458e05686216179ee5c791bb7a1f70f9b/docs/markdown/pipelines/exomeseq.md) and visit the official [nf-core documentation](https://nf-co.re/sarek/2.7.2). For older version, select the respective one in the drop-down menu on the right hand side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **_Note_** The pipeline was recently rewritten to DSL2, which brought a significant amount of changes. This document details usage for nf-core/sarek >3.0. If you need to rerun older versions, please take a look [here](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/pipeline-docs/blob/7f79a88458e05686216179ee5c791bb7a1f70f9b/docs/markdown/pipelines/exomeseq.md) and visit the official [nf-core documentation](https://nf-co.re/sarek/2.7.2). For older versions, select the respective one in the drop-down menu on the right hand side.
```

> :warning: In older versions parameters are not validated! It is easy to get command line flags wrong, please double check that the respective parameter exists in the version you are using!

## Input csv file

### Starting from Fastq

In order to use sarek, you will need to create your own input file. You can find more information on how to create your input file in the [sarek input documentation](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.1.2/usage#input-sample-sheet-configurations).

We usually start our analyses at QBiC from paired-end fastq files. For these files, so you can take this `input.csv` as example:

> ```csv
> patient,sex,status,sample,lane,fastq_1,fastq_2
> patient1,XX,0,normal_sample,lane_1,/path/to/Data/test_L001_1.fastq.gz,/path/to/Data/test_L001_2.fastq.gz
> patient1,XX,0,normal_sample,lane_2,/path/to/Data/test_L002_1.fastq.gz,/path/to/Data/test_L002_2.fastq.gz
> patient1,XX,0,normal_sample,lane_3,/path/to/Data/test_L003_1.fastq.gz,/path/to/Data/test_L003_2.fastq.gz
> patient1,XX,1,tumor_sample,lane_1,/path/to/Data/test2_L001_1.fastq.gz,/path/to/Data/test2_L001_2.fastq.gz
> patient1,XX,1,tumor_sample,lane_2,/path/to/Data/test2_L002_1.fastq.gz,/path/to/Data/test2_L002_2.fastq.gz
> patient1,XX,1,relapse_sample,lane_1,/path/to/Data/test3_L001_1.fastq.gz,/path/to/Data/test3_L001_2.fastq.gz
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: I would just leave the link to the docs on how to create the samplesheet so this does not need to be updated every time

Columns:

> - _patient_: the first column contains the subject ID. Samples belonging to the same patient / animal, should have the same subject ID.
> - _sex_ (optional, default: NA): the subject sex. XX for women, XY for men. This column is required for copy-number calling, for all other analysis types it is _optional_ and has no effect.
> - _status_ (optional, default: 0): 0 for normal samples, 1 for tumor samples. This is important for somatic variant calling.
> - _sample_: sample ID must be unique across all samples. However, samples that are spread over several lanes must have the same ID to be merged correctly. Depending on the type of experiment, the `Q_TEST_SAMPLE` is a good candidate to be used here.
> - _lane_: if a sample is spread over multiple lanes, just enter the files individually in different rows, with the same sample ID but different lane IDs. In this example, the normal sample is spread over 3 lanes, and the first tumor sample over 2 lanes. The relapse sample is not spread over several lanes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Same here...

Author: At least for the sample using the qbic thing seems like useful info? I don't know how often it is used by the biopms or they use their own sample ids...

- _Fastq1_: First Fastq pair (R1).
- _Fastq2_: Second Fastq pair (R2).

### Starting from BAM/CRAM

The pipeline now natively contains qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq. This means that for analyses that include re-aligning, the pipeline can be started directly from BAM files.

Furthermore, the pipeline supports starting fom different steps to allow easy re-analysis or complementary analysis. For details on the input sample sheet and required parameters, start checking [here](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.1.2/usage#start-with-duplicate-marking---step-markduplicates).

## Variant calling tools

> You can check which tools are available for Germline variant calling and Somatic variant calling. Not all tools are available for both steps. See overview [here](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.1.2/usage#which-variant-calling-tool-is-implemented-for-which-data-type)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check which tools are available for germline variant calling and somatic variant calling. Not all tools are available for both steps. See overview [here](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.1.2/usage#which-variant-calling-tool-is-implemented-for-which-data-type)
```

--tools 'haplotypecaller,strelka,mutect2,manta,ascat,controlfreec,cnvkit,vep,snpeff' \
```

> **_Note_**: We parallelize across genomic regions. This speeds up computation at the expense of storage. Since often storage is a bottleneck, it is useful to reduce the amount of parallelization. For this, you can increase the parameter `--nucleotides_per_second`. Recommended setting: `100000`.

### Somatic Variant Calling

#### Paired

If your analysis requires _only_ somatic variant calls and no germline variant calling, set `--only_paired_variant_calling` to reduce the amount of computation done.

#### Tumor-only

If you run tumor-only samples without matched normals, it is _highly_ recommended to generate a panel-of-normals for Mutect2 and CNVKit. For details, see here for [mutect2](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.1.2/usage#how-to-create-a-panel-of-normals-for-mutect2) and [cnvkit](https://cnvkit.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tumor.html) for details.

#### Visualization

Depending on your project, `vep`-annotated vcf makes creation of oncoplots with [maftools](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/maftools/inst/doc/maftools.html) easier.

## Whole Exome and Targeted Sequencing

> Running WES analysis and targeted sequencing with Sarek requires the BED file that specifies the Exomic regions or the Targeted regions that were used in the exome capture kit or Targeted design.

Reviewer: Minor beauty suggestion: For uniformity reasons: write `sarek` with or without capital letters throughout the text (as it is a name maybe capital is the choice `Sarek`)

  /nfsmounts/igenomes/Homo_sapiens/Ensembl/GRCh37/Exome_BED/Twist_Exome_Target_GRCh37_noUn_gl000228_2020_05_05.bed
  ```

- `hg38` & `Agilent Technologies capture kit`

  ```txt
  /nfsmounts/igenomes/Homo_sapiens/UCSC/hg38/Exome_BED/S31285117_Regions_Agilent_Technologies_exome_hc38.bed
  ```

- `hg19` & `Twist capture kit`

  ```txt
  /nfsmounts/igenomes/Homo_sapiens/UCSC/hg19/Exome_BED/Twist_Exome_Target_hg19_noUn_gl000228_2020_05_05.bed
  ```

- Mouse `mm10` & `Agilent SureSelect All Exon`

  ```txt
  /nfsmounts/igenomes/Mus_musculus/UCSC/mm10/Exome_BED/mm10_Agilent_SureSelect_Mouse_All_Exon_Kit_2016_01_21_sorted.bed
  ```

- Mouse `GRCm38` & `Agilent SureSelect Mouse`

  ```txt
  /nfsmounts/igenomes/Mus_musculus/Ensembl/GRCm38/Exome_BED/GRCm38_Agilent_SureSelect_Mouse_All_Exon_Kit_2016_01_21_sorted.bed
  ```

In general for WES data analysis people advise to use target regions that are padded (e.g. +- 150 bp). But to be precise there are multiple aspects:

- The mapping should be done on the whole reference to get information about multi reads mapping also outside of the exome (to discard). This is done by default by the pipeline, even when the target bed file is provided.

> - Then reads mapping within the target exome regions should be kept, for this a padding should be added to prevent loosing reads at the boarders. This is done by default by the pipeline for base quality score recalibration and variant calling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reads mapping within the target exome regions should be kept. For this a padding should be added to prevent loosing reads at the borders. This is done by default by the pipeline for base quality score recalibration and variant calling.
```

> - for QC to get an unbiased view about the overall quality of the experiment its best to use the exact target regions without padding. The pipeline can currently not be run with various bed files. If this is necessary, it might be useful to rerun certain steps with unpadded target files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order to get an unbiased view about the overall quality of the experiment its best to use the exact target regions without padding. The pipeline can currently not be run with various bed files. If this is necessary, it might be useful to rerun certain steps with unpadded target files.
```

> - and for the final variants it depends, if one want to be sure not to increase the number of FPs it would also make sense to use unpadded target regions. If the goal would be to get as many variants as possible, then of course one could use padded regions (which made quite a difference in the final numbers in my case)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Regarding the use of padded or unpadded target regions for the final variants it depends, if the objective of the analysis is to be sure not to increase the number of FPs (unpadded target regions) or to get as many variants as possible (padded regions).
```

> - Sarek actually maps reads against the whole reference, and then uses the target bed file for the QC, BQSR, and to filter variants. So _simply hand over the unpadded target region_. This is usually provided by the Exon capture kit company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sarek actually maps reads against the whole reference, and then uses the target bed file for the QC, BQSR, and to filter variants. So _simply hand over the unpadded target region_. This is usually provided by the exon capture kit company.
```

- BED file compatibility: if you have to use your own BED file, make sure the chromosome names are compatible between the reference and the targetBED file (e.g. UCSC “chr1” <-> Ensemble “1”). For human, if they differ and your analysis is done only on main chromosomes, then you could simply convert the names by adding “chr” to the chromosome names.

## Known issues

- There is currently a bug regarding the reference names: if you specify `--genome GRCh38`, sarek actually uses `hg38` (UCSC naming convention, and not Ensembl). See the [issue](https://github.com/nf-core/sarek/issues/86).

> - Our cluster has problems with MarkDuplicates Spark, which is why is should be avoided. As of `2.7` the non-spark variant is run by default. Please be aware to set `--no_gatk_spark` if you run `2.6.1` or earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Our cluster has problems with MarkDuplicates Spark, which is why it should be avoided. As of `2.7` the non-spark variant is run by default. Please be aware to set `--no_gatk_spark` if you run `2.6.1` or earlier.
```
